Sets and Notation
1.1 Defining sets
Definition. A set is an unordered collection of distinct objects. The objects in a
set are called the elements, or members, of the set. A set is said to contain its elements.
A set can be defined by simply listing its members inside curly braces. For example,
the set {2, 4, 17, 23} is the same as the set {17, 4, 23, 2}. To denote membership we
use the ∈ symbol, as in 4 ∈ {2, 4, 17, 23}. On the other hand, non-membership is
denoted as in 5 6∈ {2, 4, 17, 23}.
If we want to specify a long sequence that follows a pattern, we can use the ellipsis
notation, meaning “fill in, using the same pattern”. The ellipsis is often used after two
or more members of the sequence, and before the last one, as follows: {1, 2, . . . , n}.
The pattern denoted by the ellipsis should be apparent at first sight! For instance,
{1, . . . , n} is generally regarded as underspecified (that is, too ambiguous). Of course,
even {1, 2, . . . , n} is still ambiguous—did we mean all integers between 1 and n, all
powers of two up to n, or perhaps the set {1, 2, 25, n}?—but is generally sufficient,
unless you really do mean all powers of two up to n, in which case {2
0
, 2
1
, 2
2
, . . . , 2
k}
for an appropriate k is a better choice. The ellipsis can also be used to define an
infinite set, as in the following.
Definition. The set of natural numbers or nonnegative integers, denoted by N, is
defined as {0, 1, 2, . . .}.
To avoid ambiguities it is often useful to use the set builder notation, which lists
on the right side of the colon the property that any set element, specified on the left
side of the colon, has to satisfy. Let’s define the positive integers using the set builder
notation:
N
+ = {x : x ∈ N and x > 0}.
We can also write
N
+ = {x ∈ N : x > 0}.
1
This is a matter of taste. In general, use the form that will be easiest for the reader
of your work to understand. Often it is the least “cluttered” one.
Ok, now onto the integers:
Z = {x : x ∈ N or −x ∈ N}.
Hmm, perhaps in this case it is actually better to write
Z = {. . . , −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, . . .}.
Remember, when you write mathematics, you should keep your readers’ perspective
in mind. For now, we—the staff of this course—are your readers. In the future it
might be your colleagues, supervisors, or the readers of your published work. In
addition to being reasonably formal and unambiguous, your mathematical writing
should be as clear and understandable to your intended readership as possible.
Here are the rational numbers:
Q =
na
b
: a ∈ Z, b ∈ Z, b 6= 0o
.
Instead of a ∈ Z, b ∈ Z, you can write a, b ∈ Z, which is more concise and generally
more readable. Don’t go overboard, though, with writing something like a, b 6= 0 ∈ Z,
this is way too confusing and does not say what you want it to.
Finally, the set of real numbers is denoted by R. All the reals that are not rational
are called
√
irrational. These include the familiar π = 3.1415926..., e = 2.7182818...,
2, and infinitely many others. (How do we know that these numbers are irrational,
do you ask? Actually, we will see a proof of this for √
2 shortly. The proofs for π and
e require mathematical analysis and are outside our scope.)
On being formal. Were the above definitions formal enough? The answer is: it
depends. For example, defining the natural numbers is an important and non-trivial
accomplishment of mathematics. After all, what do these symbols “1”, “2”, “3”,
actually mean? These numbers can be formally defined in terms of sets. Even more
involved is the formal definition of the reals, usually covered in a first mathematical
analysis course.
Here we cannot afford to cover everything in complete detail, which would have to
include, among other things, basic algebra and trigonometry. Furthermore, the vast
majority of mathematical works, while considered to be “formal”, gloss over details
all the time. For example, you’ll be hard-pressed to find a mathematical paper that
goes through the trouble of justifying the equation a
2 − b
2 = (a − b)(a + b). In effect,
every mathematical paper or lecture assumes a shared knowledge base with its readers
or listeners. It is extremely important for an author of mathematics, such as yourself
during this course, to estimate this shared knowledge base correctly!
In CS103X we will assume most of high-school mathematics, including perhaps
some AP math like single-variable calculus, as our shared knowledge base. Thus
notions and techniques from this base will generally not be justified in lecture, and
can be used freely in your homework and exams. Furthermore, once we develop certain
2
notation or prove some theorem in class, you can use these freely in your homework
and exams, provided that you clearly cite the appropriate theorems. In writing and
speaking mathematics, a delicate balance is maintained between being formal and
not getting bogged down in minutia.1 This balance usually becomes second-nature
with experience. You should all get the hang of it by the end of the quarter.